Are Westernization and modernization interrelated?
Is it possible for modernization to occur without
modernity being present? The derivation of the latter
pair of words suggests a close relationship, and for
much of the twentieth century Westernization has
been treated as an implicit factor in any moderniza-
tion. (Ref.1)  I would argue, though, that this is not
the case - that modernity is a construct which has
certain attributes that are associated with Western
culture but that are not necessary for modernization.
Japan's industrialization, with its rapid shift from a
politically isolated and feudal nation to the second
largest economy in the world, demonstrates that nei-
ther Westernization nor modernity is necessary for
modernization. It also suggests that modernization
does not seem to foster the eventual development of
modernity, even where the two are treated as com-
plementary.
Modernity refers to a set of related attributes that
resulted from the Industrial Revolution and its social
and economic ramifications. Because the Industrial
Revolution was the result of technological advances,
in modernity scientific and rational thought are val-
ued and economic efficiencies are promoted. This
emphasis on rational thought and abstraction means
that conscious states are considered more important
than subconscious states; aesthetic or intuitive ways
of thinking are considered peripheral to develop-
ment. Modernity is also tied to Christianity through
the Weberian proposition that Calivinism promoted
hard work and capital accumulation. This is not to
claim that modern nations are Christian (although
many of Japan's modernizers were also encouraged
by American supporters to embrace Christianity) but
only that Christianity was to have established a set of
values which fostered modernity. In fact, under
modernity, tradition is rejected in favor of progress;
development away from all traditions, including reli-
gion, is treated positively. Additionally, although this
point will not be addressed here, the political and
economic shifts which accompanied the Industrial
Revolution and led to democracy or the privileging
of the individual were implicit in modernity.
Modernization refers to technological advancement
and so, on its surface, would seem to imply parallel
developments to those seen during the Industrial
Revolution in the West, especially as these techno-
logical developments generally lead to economic
expansion and political change. A state of modern-
ization can be said to exist when the country in ques-
tion has arrived at a point comparable to the techno-
logical development of other leading nations - but it
does not imply a cultural or political condition.
Where industrialization is learned, rather than devel-
oped internally, many of the cultural attributes origi-
nally necessary in the Industrial Revolution do not
emerge, or are freely adapted.
Using this set of definitions, it can be argued that
modernization and modernity, while they appear to
be a tautology, can be isolated. Ironically, Japan
proves this point through a complete disregard for
many of the key concepts of modernity. The country
did, however, deliberately set out to both modernize
and Westernize. That it has successfully modernized,
while having been unsuccessful in its attempts to
Westernize, demonstrates where these issues diverge.
While most of basic points of modernity simply do
not apply to Japanese culture, the crucial differences
in the field of architecture are probably the privileg-
ing of subconscious over rational thought and the
WITHOUT MODERNITY:
Japan's Challenging Modernization
Dana Buntrock
University of Illinois at Chicago
acceptance of tradition in general, particularly reli-
gious traditions. As John Clammer states in an exten-
sive discussion of the topic of modernity in Japan,
"The concrete rather than the abstract, mundane detail
rather than grand theory, the acceptance of the con-
vergent and the fleeting rather than the permanent and
the eternal... can be seen immediately in Japanese
poetry, painting, architecture and even modern town
planning." (Ref.2) Moreover, the metanarrative of
Christianity does not exist in a country where fewer
than two percent of the population is Christian; in its
place is a regard for nature - although, as in the West,
this may be honored more in the breach. But a close
look at the architecture of Japan will make clear that
many of the other traditions of Japanese architecture
continue to be esteemed and are consciously referred
to in the theoretic foundations of any of major archi-
tect. (Ref.3) In contrast to Modernist architects from
the West, architects in Japan may move com (fortably
between a contemporary palette and explicit refer-
ences to earlier styles. (Ref.4)
In contrast with the issue of modernity, the integra-
tion of Westernization and modernization has a long
history in Japan. So, as C.E. Black points out, while it
would be preposterous to refer to the earliest modern-
ization of England and France as "Westernization,"
the two terms are commonly linked in discussions of
Japan. (Ref.5) During the mid-nineteenth century
modernization of Japan, referred to in the traditional
calendar as the Meiji Era, leaders accepted that indus-
trialization and Westernization were reciprocal and
that both were necessary for development. (Ref.6)  In
addition to actively promoting telegraph, lighthouse,
and railroad construction, for example, the govern-
ment also used Western buildings and institutions to
advance its modernization program. Japan employed
Western engineers to build the nation's infrastructure
and Western architects to design offices, banks, uni-
versities, and schools; these specialists were collec-
tively referred to as oyatoi. (Ref.7)  In more isolated
areas, where Western architects were not present,
indigenous carpenters attempted to reproduce the fin-
ishes and spatial characteristics of Western architec-
ture, particularly in the construction of government
offices and primary schools. (Ref.8)
The use of new forms of architecture in support of
introduced institutions was widespread. In the period
between 1869 and 1882, Japan established navy, tele-
graph, and postal systems based on the British forms
of these institutions; an army, private schools, and
police and judicial systems based on French typolo-
gies; and banking and agricultural college systems
based on those found in the United States. (Ref.9)
These new civic and cultural institutions naturally
required that they be housed in compatible structures;
as such building types had already evolved with the
institutions, the Japanese were quick to encourage
oyatoi and their Japanese counterparts to utilize estab-
lished typologies. The foreign architects and engi-
neers produced barns, vocational classrooms, post
offices, and railroad stations - to name only a few of
the introduced building types - based upon their expe-
riences at home.
This construction program, which affected every com-
munity in the country, fostered major cultural shifts in
that the conventional ways of inhabiting a space by
sitting on the floor were no longer appropriate in
these buildings. The Japanese - members of the elite
in particular, as they were being schooled in Western-
style buildings, visiting or working from Western-
style governmental offices, and attending formal
events in Western clubs and reception rooms - found
that the architecture demanded they use Western fur-
niture and dress in Western clothes and shoes.
(Ref.10) In fact, the government went so far as to
pass an edit which required that all public servants
wear Western clothing and children in schools wear
uniforms styled in a Western manner. Furthermore, as
part of Japan's "modernization" drive, The emperor
also promoted Western customs such as eating meat
and ballroom dancing, and academics seriously advo-
cated the abandonment of the Japanese writing system
in favor of the alphabet. Japanese leaders embraced
this behavior as demonstrating that the country was
achieving civilization by the standards of the interna-
tional community.
V5n3: Without Modernity,  Page 2
Cultural features of Western countries were advocated
as a necessary part of the modernization process
because Japan's leaders accepted the idea that there
was a single model for modernization, and that the
successfully-industrialized countries of Europe and
North America represented this model. Western coun-
tries reinforced these assumptions by judging Japan's
progress based on cultural changes as well as on
political and economic terms; it was suggested that
only by achieving Western standards in all spheres
would Japan be able to operate internationally as an
equal to the nations of the West. In this regard, both
sides were influenced by a primary tenet of moderni-
ty, the universality of any successful approach. This
belief was not confined to the nineteenth century.
Although Japan began to reject as inappropriate the
wholesale adoption of Western customs as early as
the end of the Meiji period in 1912, foreign acade-
mics studying Japan, referred to as the Modernization
School, still argued for a universal model as late as
the 1970s. (Ref.11)
To say, though, that the West is present in Japan is not
necessarily to claim that Japan has Westernized. As
one example, the early introduction of foreign archi-
tecture during the Meiji period has clearly altered
Japanese construction practices. Western materials
were rapidly adopted; first brick, and later concrete,
were understood to offer a solution to the frequent
and catastrophic fires which had plagued Japan's
cities. However, even buildings designed by oyatoi
were not entirely Western in their design and execu-
tion: roofs were often fabricated of local materials for
reasons of economy, and the internal structure of
most "Western" buildings was still very much a result
of Japanese construction practices. The wall, with its
Western appearance and its Japanese internal struc-
ture, offers a useful analogy for many other areas of
Japanese culture. As Jean-Pierre Lehmann noted in an
insightful book on outside interpretations of Japan,
"There is considerable doubt and diversity of opinion
among scholars today regarding the depth of Western
penetration in Japan; in other words, while admitting
changes on the surface, one may ask to what extent
these changes were profoundly implanted..." (Ref.12)
The blending of traditional fabrication practices and
Western materials technologies is in fact still evident
today. Japanese carpentry, for instance, tended to rely
on moment-resistant joints with prefabricated connec-
tions, allowing for rapid assembly on site. Now
Japanese steel construction, using an introduced mate-
rial, follows the same strategy. The structures of most
urban buildings are assembled in a matter of days,
using two- to three-story components with prefabri-
cated moment-resistant joints, unlike site-based steel
construction seen in the United States. The construc-
tion of a contemporary steel building at first appears
to be Western because traditional Japanese spatial
forms and materials are not evident and materials
developed in the West are used. However, it is more
accurate to say that Japanese practice advanced by
creating a hybrid based on the materials technologies
from the West and conventional construction prac-
tices. As in other areas of industrial and technological
development, Japan already had an established and
successful set of practices, but materials - or in other
cases, technologies - which were first developed in
the West were found to be more suitable the nation's
needs.
Therefore, while the West was emulated widely and
freely, only selected aspects of Western culture were
adopted. Previously unknown machines or materials
need not be rediscovered; as Kenneth Pyle wrote in
The Making of Modern Japan, "The steam engine did
not have to be invented a second time." (Ref.13)  The
cultural context which initially supported the
Industrial Revolution in the West was also not neces-
sary to this modernization; instead development could
be managed by selecting those elements which
appeared most useful. The adaptation of new systems
might result in changes through the acceptance of
Western elements, but did not immediately prevent
Japanese conventions from being maintained in an
adapted form.
To assume that these adoptions signal a shift towards
V5n3: Without Modernity,  Page 3
the originating culture is a mistake as the utilization
of new institutions and new technologies does not
necessarily indicate acceptance of the original cultur-
al framework in which these systems developed.
(Ref.14) While at first glance Japan has very clearly
incorporated many of the trappings of Western soci-
ety, the continuing differences in Japanese forms are
worth noting. The evolution of the railroad station in
Japan, first introduced as part of Japan's moderniza-
tion drive, has resulted in something quite different
from the transportation centers of the West. Because
private rail companies have actively developed the
areas around their own stations, building department
stores at central locations and housing communities
in suburban areas, these areas have emerged as the
focal points in Japan's urban life.
For a long time, these differences were ascribed sim-
ply to a modernization/Westernization which was
still incomplete. However, it is no longer appropriate
to assume that further Westernization will occur as a
result of increased economic or technological
advances. After all, in economic terms Japan has sur-
passed many of the countries that were its original
models. Instead, as one of the few nations to success-
fully initiate industrialization in the nineteenth centu-
ry, Japan offers provocative evidence that moderniza-
tion can be had on terms which are not those estab-
lished by the original modernizers.
Copyright 1996 by Dana Buntrock
Material appearing in Architronic may be distributed
freely by electronic or any other means, providing
that any such distribution is without charge (unless
for purposes of cost recovery by interlibrary loan ser-
vices) and that Architronic is acknowledged as the
source. However, no article may be reprinted in any
publication without the explicit written permission of
the author(s). This statement must accompany all
distributions of Architronic, whether complete or
partial.
V5n3: Without Modernity,  Page 4
REFERENCES 
Ref.1: See for example Black, C.E. The Dynamics of Modernization: A Study of Comparative History. (New York: Harper & Row,
1966). 
Ref.2: Clammer, John. Difference and Modernity: Social Theory and Contemporary Japanese Society. (London: Kegan Paul
International, 1995), 65. 
Ref.3: Architects tend to refer to different points, though. Isozaki, for instance, has emphasized Japanese spatial characteristics in his
writings on Ma, Maki writes on village organization and the oku, and Kurokawa focuses on the culture of play and on wabi, theaes-
thetic of poverty which influenced tea. 
Ref.4: Some projects which stand out as being unusual for architects working in a Modernist vein include the tea houses designed by
Kurokawa Kisho, the neo-Renaissance work of Isozaki, and the use of traditional detailing, particularly in the stone, of Maki's Kyoto
Museum of Contemporary Art. 
Ref.5: Black, 6. 
Ref.6: The Meiji Era extended from 1868 through 1912, and is still commonly considered as the most active period of Japan's indus-
trial development. It is not, however, considered to be the beginning of Japan's modern age, which many academics today date to the
early Tokugawa Shogunate, in the beginning of the 17th century.
Ref.7: These projects are covered exhaustively in Finn, Dallas. Meiji Revisited: the Sites of Victorian Japan. (New York: Weatherhill
Inc., 1995). 
Ref.8: This point was made by Dr. Fujimori Terunobu in his book Nihon no Kindai Kenchiku. Volume 1: Bakufu* Meiji . (Tokyo:
Iwanami Shinsho, 1993). 
Ref.9: Pyle, Kenneth B. The Making of Modern Japan. (Lexington, Massachusetts, D.C. Heath & Co., 2nd edition, 1996), 79. 
Ref.10: This point is made in Yoshida Mitsukuni, et al., eds. The Hybrid Culture: What Happened When East and West Met . (Tokyo:
Cosmo Public Relations Corp., 1984), 64. 
Ref.11: Williams, David. Japan: Beyond the End of History. (London: Routledge, 1994), xvi. Kurokawa Kisho argues that Japanese
architects saw modernization and Westernization as equivalent as late as the period following the postwar occupation by American
forces. See Kurokawa Kisho. New Wave Japanese Architecture. (London, Academy Editions, 1993),
7-8. 
Ref.12: Lehmann, Jean-Pierre. The Image of Japan: From Feudal Isolation to World Power. (London: George Allen & Unwin,
1978), 24. 
Ref.13: Pyle, 104. 
Ref.14: See, for example Tobin, Joseph, ed. Remade in Japan: Everyday Life and Consumer Taste in a Changing Society. (New
Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1992).
In addition to those books listed in the footnotes, useful references for readers who are interested in further exploring the general
topic of modernization and Westernization in Japan include:
Gluck, Carol. Japan's Modern Myths: Ideology in the Late Meiji Period. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985).
Jansen, Marius B. Changing Japanese Attitudes Towards Modernization. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965).
Marius Jansen, ed. The Emergence of Meiji Japan. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.) This book is made up of selec-
tions from Chapter 5 of the Cambridge History of Japan.
Kuwabara Takeo. Japan and Western Civilization. (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1983).
Smith, Thomas C. Native Sources of Japanese Industrialization . (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988).
Totman, Conrad. Early Modern Japan. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993). A further reference for readers who are
interested in exploring the topic of Meiji architecture:
Stewart, David. The Making of a Modern Japanese Architecture: 1868 to the Present. (Tokyo: Kodansha International Press, 1987.) 
V5n3: Without Modernity,  Page 5
