Lost in the Market, Saved at McDonald’s:
Conversion to Christianity in Urban China
FENGGANG YANG
Protestant Christianity has been growing very fast in China under communist rule. This article shows that the
converts are not all marginalized individuals deprived of material and social resources. An increasing proportion
of the converts are well-educated young people in urban China. To explain this conversion to a nontraditional
religion, the micro-level factors of individual crisis, individual choices, and personal bonds are inadequate.
The meso-level institutional factors of organizational strengths and competitiveness are important, but religious
organizations are severely constrained by restrictive regulations in China. I argue that the macro-level contextual
factors are very important to understand the phenomenon of large-scale conversion to Christianity in China
today. The crucial contextual factors are the increasingly globalized market economy under political repression.
Christianity provides peace and certainty in facing wild market forces. The Christian faith is liberating amid a
stifling political atmosphere. McDonald’s is a prominent symbol of the globalized market, which, like Christianity,
is perceived as modern and cosmopolitan within the Chinese context.
The “Golden Arches” of the McDonald’s restaurants have become common scenes in major
Chinese cities, often conspicuously dotting the rapidly changing skylines. Walking through the
arches are many young people seeking a sense of modernity and a new meaning of life in the
globalizing market. It might appear incongruous to associate the icon of American capitalist
culture (Ritzer 2000:5) with religious salvation. However, I have observed a close connection
between the two in China that is fascinating and intriguing.
In summer 2000, when I was conducting field work research in Nanfang (pseudonym), a city
in southern China, I interviewed about three dozen young professionals and businesspeople who
had become Christian. When I asked my interviewees to pick a place to meet for an interview,
McDonald’s was the most frequent choice. Moreover, several of my interviewees separately and
fondly told me this story. Not long ago a McDonald’s on the top floor of a skyscraper in downtown
Nanfang became a clandestine gathering place for the “Timothy Training Course,” an effective
tool of Christian evangelism and discipleship. At the gathering inside the spacious restaurant, they
would find a corner and spread out at nine nearby tables. Each table was for one of the progressive
lessons of the course, with one or two leaders and up to 10 prospective or new converts. Several
of the lesson leaders or evangelists were Americans. The weekly gathering of up to 100 people
finally caught the attention of the police, who then raided the McDonald’s one night and took
all the participants to the police station. The offense was illegal religious gathering. Government
regulations require that all religious activities take place only within designated religious premises
approved by the Religious Affairs Bureau. Fortunately, or by divine providence as my interviewees
said, on that particular night the foreigners for one reason or other were not able to make it or
arrived late, and thus avoided the trouble. At the police station, the leaders were sifted out through
interrogations and ordered to plea guilty, or face extended detention and additional penalties.
Passing midnight, the resistant leaders finally signed the pledge form to get out on bail by writing
on the form, “we promise not to meet for Bible study again at this McDonald’s.” It satisfied the
police, and my interviewees maintained that they had kept the pledge without having to stop
gathering for Bible study. “We stopped gathering at this McDonald’s,” a young man said to me,
“but there are dozens of them in this city.” A big grin glowed on his face.
Fenggang Yang is Assistant Professor in the Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Purdue University, 700 W. State
Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907. E-mail: fyang@purdue.edu
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion (2005) 44(4):423–441
424 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
Why Christianity? Why McDonald’s? Why do urban young people convert to Christianity in
China today? The conventional wisdom tends to explain religious conversion by pointing to the
marginalized social status of the converts, which is called the deprivation explanation (Bainbridge
1992). Following this line of thinking, some scholars like to point out that Christian growth in
China mostly happens in the underdeveloped rural areas (Hunter and Chan 1993; Leung 1999).
Given the fact that most of the Chinese population is still rural, it is not surprising that a majority
of Christians in China reside in the rural areas. However, Chinese Christians are not necessarily
more rural than the general population. In other words, the proportion of rural Christians among
all Christians may not be higher than the proportion of rural residents in the general population.1
Following the same line of deprivation explanation, some people like to say that most Chris-
tians in both urban and rural areas are old, female, and illiterate or semi-illiterate (Dunch 2001:
203; Hunter and Chan 1993:73). However, I have observed that an increasing proportion of ur-
ban converts are young and well-educated professionals. This is evident in the church statistics
I present in this article, and it is also confirmed by other researchers. These urban young people
have fared quite well in the growing market economy. What factors account for their conversion
to Christianity? What does it have to do with McDonald’s?
CONVERSION THEORIES
In the sociological study of religious conversion, the process model first proposed by Lofland
and Stark (1965; see also Stark and Finke 2000:ch. 4) has been most influential. It extends the
analytic scope beyond individual psychology or deprivation to social bonds and networks. Since
the 1960s, most studies of religious conversion have been on the conversion process of individuals
to cults or new religions (e.g., Lofland and Stark 1965; Barker 1984; for reviews, see Greil and Rudy
1984; Snow and Machalek 1984; Kilbourne and Richardson 1989), or on individual “returnees”
or “switchers” within mainstream Protestantism, Catholicism, or Judaism (e.g., Davidman 1991;
Kaufman 1991; Suchman 1992; Davidman and Greil 1993; see also Newport 1979; Roof and
Hadaway 1979; Hoge 1981; Sullins 1993; Musick and Wilson 1995). Research of this kind pays
little or no attention to the larger social and cultural contexts within which the individuals change
their religion. This individualistic approach is inadequate to explain the phenomenon of large-scale
conversions, such as the “great transformation” of a tribe or nation to Christianity (Hefner 1993),
or “the rapid spread of evangelical Protestantism in vast areas of the underdeveloped societies”
(Martin 1990:vii).
In the study of growth and decline of religious denominations, religious economy supply-side
theory emphasizes the competitive strength of growing religious groups, from efficient polity and
clergy, to attractive theology and services, and to effective recruitment strategies (Finke and Stark
1992; Stark and Finke 2000). The factors emphasized here are related to institutional features of
the religious organizations themselves.
This institutionalist approach has been applied to explain the varied levels of religious revivals
in post-Soviet societies as well (Froese 2001, 2004; Froese and Pfaff 2001). In those societies, the
common pattern of religious change is the return or revival of the traditional religion that had been
dominant before communist rule, although other old and new religions may have increased as
well. In contrast, a nontraditional religion—Protestant Christianity—has been growing fastest in
today’s China, which continues to be under communist rule (Bays 2003; Hunter and Chan 1993).
Religious organizations are severely constrained by the dominant atheist ideology, anti-religious
policies, and restrictive regulations, which I will describe later in this article. Despite institutional
constraints, however, Protestant Christianity has been exploding throughout China (Aikman 2003;
Dunch 2001; Lambert 1999; Yang 2004a).
To explain the large-scale Chinese conversion to evangelical Christianity among Chinese
immigrants in the United States, elsewhere I have analyzed the importance of social and cultural
contexts (Yang 1998). Before World War II, in spite of intensive proselytizing efforts by American
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 425
Christian churches and individuals, only a tiny minority of Chinese immigrants in the United States
converted to Christianity. However, post-1965 Chinese immigrants have established hundreds of
Protestant churches by and for themselves, and the majority of church members are adult converts
from non-Christian backgrounds (Ng 2002; Yang 1999). Christianity has probably become the
most practiced institutional religion among the Chinese in America (Yang 2002). I find that the
most important factors for the Christian conversion of Chinese immigrants are dramatic social and
cultural changes in the process of coerced modernization—wars, social turmoil, political storms,
and the collapse of Chinese traditional cultural systems. The immigrant experience as a racial
minority in the United States further intensifies their existential needs for spiritual certainty.
“Coming from such a society, Chinese immigrants are both free and bound to seek alternate
meaning systems” (Yang 1998:253). The intensified Christian evangelism among the Chinese
immigrants in the United States was as much a response to their increasing responsiveness to
Christianity as a cause of Christian growth among them.
In short, the contextual factors are more important than the institutional factors and personal
bonds to explain the large scale conversion to Christianity among Chinese immigrants in the United
States. Are these arguments applicable to Christian conversion in China today? While China and
the United States are very different societies, since 1979 China has been moving toward a market
economy. More importantly, the dramatic social and cultural changes in the process of coerced
modernization are shared experiences of both Chinese emigrants and nonemigrants.
In this article, I argue that the rapid growth of Christianity in China today certainly has impor-
tant institutional factors: Christian organizations have been proselytizing. Individual psychology
and interpersonal bonds are at work as well. However, the micro- and meso-level factors have to be
situated in the macro-level, broader contexts. Reform-era China has been moving toward a market
economy that is increasingly integrated in a rapidly globalizing world, yet the authorities maintain
political repression. The emerging market is exciting and perilous, accompanied by widespread
moral corruption, which prompts many individuals to seek a theodicy, or a religious worldview,
to put the seemingly chaotic universe into order (Weber [1922] 1963). Facing the modernizing
challenges, some people search internally in their cultural roots and find faith in a traditional
religion such as Buddhism or Confucianism (Tamney and Chiang 2002), whereas many others
search externally in other cultures, especially Western culture, and find faith in Christianity.
For the Western-oriented Chinese, Christianity is not something traditional, conservative, or
restrictive. Rather, it is perceived as progressive, liberating, modern, and universal. For Chinese
converts, Christianity is a faith that provides peace, certainty, and liberation amid bewildering
market forces and a stifling political atmosphere. To the young and educated Chinese who are
consciously seeking modernity and integration with the rest of the world, McDonald’s appears
to share similar characteristics of modernity and cosmopolitanism (Ritzer 2000; Watson 1997).
What is more, in McDonald’s is a beloved American flavor. Not the flavor of the food, but of
American culture.
RESEARCH METHODS
This article is based on data gathered through participant observations and interviews at
Protestant churches in several cities throughout China between 2000 and 2003. The baptismal
statistics and interview data come mostly from Nanfang City in a southern coastal province, which
in the reform era since 1979 has often set trends of change for the rest of the country to follow.
Some data are from other cities.
Gathering religious data in China today is a challenging task. The government considers
religion politically sensitive and tries hard to control religious affairs in order to maintain social
and political stability. On the other hand, however, the government has allowed, even supported,
the establishment of institutes for religious research at universities and social sciences academies
(Yang 2004a). While leftist dogmatists in the ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP) continue
426 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
to exalt Marxist-Leninist atheism, the more pragmatic officials have become more open toward
religion. In the 1990s, the CCP top leader Jiang Zemin expressed the idea that religion could make
some positive contribution to the moral order as China develops a market economy, although he
also asked government agencies to remain vigilant in preventing religious organizations from
becoming subversive. Since then the authorities have encouraged scholarly research to examine
the social and moral functions of religion in China. Religious research scholars have become
active, dancing with new ideas, carrying out creatively designed projects, and producing valuable
publications (e.g., Chen and Huang 2004).
In cooperation with scholars at a research institute in Beijing, I organized a project to study
Christian ethics and market transition. The project was approved by the relevant government
authorities. Seven scholars or graduate students recruited from several universities worked with
me. Together we carried out ethnographic research in eight cities, four on the coast and four in
the inland. In each city we spent five to eight weeks doing interviews and participant observations
at Protestant churches. Given the diversity of local political climates and cultural environments,
the fieldwork research in the eight cities varies significantly. For example, in the inland cities,
interviewees tended to be more reserved, whereas coastal city Christians were more open and
responsive to our questions. Church leaders were generally cooperative, but some were less so
than others. Most of the churches we observed were government-approved ones. We find that
the boundaries between the aboveground and underground churches have become blurred. Some
underground church members attend aboveground church services, while some aboveground
church members are active in underground gatherings.
The first research site was Nanfang City, where we formally interviewed 35 Christians and
informally talked with many more people, including inquirers at churches and students at a
seminary. The formal interviews were semi-structured, including questions about conversion and
religious participation experiences, job and business experiences, and marriage and family life. We
used a tape recorder during most of the interviews and transcribed them with added notes. We also
interviewed leaders of the provincial and municipal Three Self Patriotic Movement Committees,
which are the organizational hierarchies sanctioned by the government to administer church
affairs. From them we gained access to the summary sheets of baptismal records. These are the
most comprehensive records of a city we could get throughout the whole project. Most of the
churches in other cities either showed us very sporadic and inconsistent records, or told us that
they did not keep baptismal records at all, which might be true in most cases. Because of the more
complete baptismal records and the more forthcoming interviews we collected in Nanfang City,
this article focuses on Christian converts there, supplemented by data gathered from other cities
and published reports.
THE GROWTH OF CHRISTIANITY IN CHINA IN THE 1980S AND 1990S
Christians suffered harsh suppressions in the first 30 years (1949–1979) of the People’s
Republic of China (PRC) under rule of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). When the PRC was
founded in 1949, baptized and unbaptized Protestant adherents were between 700,000 to 1 million
(Brown 1986; Chao 1981), which was about 0.2 percent of the total population at that time. The
CCP regarded Christian missionaries as agents or covert spies of Western imperialism and drove
them out of the PRC. Meanwhile, a “Three-Self Patriotic Movement Committee” (TSPM) was set
up for “self-rule, self-support and self-propagation,” which in fact has functioned as part of the state
control apparatus over Christians. Noncompliant Christian leaders were condemned as running
dogs of Western imperialism and banished to labor camps or executed. By 1958, all Christian
denominations and sects were disbanded. All Christians were forced to attend union services
under the TSPM. Non-TSPM Christian gatherings were banned. When the “Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution” broke out in 1966, all Christian churches, along with all venues of other
religions, were closed down. Religious believers were forced to denounce their faith and Christian
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 427
ministers, along with all clergy of other religions, were forced to take secular jobs, sent to jails
or labor camps, or executed. Yet Chinese Christians persevered by going underground (Aikman
2003; Chao and Chong 1997; Hunter and Chan 1993).
Since 1979, when the CCP adopted the pragmatic “economic reforms and open-door” poli-
cies, five religions (Buddhism, Catholicism, Daoism, Islam, and Protestant Christianity) have been
allowed to operate under the auspices of the “patriotic” associations. Some temples, mosques, and
churches have been reopened for religious services. All of these religions have revived, whereas
Protestantism has been growing fastest (Dunch 2001; Hunter and Chan 1993; see also Overmyer
2003). In the mid 1990s, the TSPM publicly reported that China had about 14 million Protestants
(ANS 1997). This means a growth of 14 to 20 times since 1949 in spite of 13 years of eradication
measures between 1966 and 1979. If underground “house church” Christians were included, the
number of Protestants could be as many as 80 million (Chao and Chong 1997). Even if we take
the prudent estimate of around 50 million (Bays 2003; Lambert 1999), it is still 50 to 70 times
more than the number in 1949.
In Nanfang City, the baptismal records kept by the municipal TSPM indicate that Protestant
growth accelerated in the 1990s. Eight churches had been reopened in the urban districts of
Nanfang when we conducted the research in summer 2000. The total number of baptisms in all
these churches between 1980 and 1998 is shown in Figure 1. The average number of baptisms
(mean) per year in all eight churches was 215 in the 1980s and 389 in the 1990s. This does not
include baptisms at the underground house churches in Nanfang, which might be as many or even
more.
FIGURE 1
CONVERTS IN THE CITY OF NANFANG CITY, 1980–1998
Note: Only adults 18 years old or older were allowed to be baptized. Summary data of 1991 and 1992 from the Nanfang
Municipal TSPM Committee were missing and the estimates are based on one large church’s baptismal records and the
overall proportion of this church over the whole city in other years. These estimates are probably lower than the actual
numbers.
Source: Baptismal records of the Nangfang Municipal Three Self Patriotic Movement Committee and baptismal records
of individual churches.
428 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
FIGURE 2
AGE OF CONVERTS IN NANFANG CITY, 1993–1998
18-19
3%
20-29
28%
30-39
20%
40-49
14%
50-59
16%
60-69
11%
70+
8%
Note: Age information of the converts in other years was not available.
Source: Baptismal records of the Nangfang Municipal Three Self Patriotic Movement Committee.
The rapid and accelerated growth is apparent in other parts of the country as well. For example,
in Feidong County, Anhui Province in Central China, the first TSPM church was formed in 1986.
By the end of 2003, the TSPM Committee had established 70 churches and gathering points
throughout the county, with over 22,000 baptized Christians (interviews with the TSPM leader).
In Cangzhou, a small city in Hebei Province in Northern China, there was no Protestant church until
1993. By the year 2000, several hundred people had been baptized (interviews and observations).
In Harbin, the capital of Helongjiang Province in the northeast, a study conducted in the mid
1990s (see Li 1999:320) reported that 72 percent of church goers at that time first began to attend
church in the 1990s, 21 percent in the 1980s, and only 7 percent started before 1982. Similar
patterns have been found in other cities.
More importantly, an increasing proportion of the new converts are well-educated young
people. Figure 2 shows that in the 1990s, a great majority of the converts in Nanfang were young
and middle-aged people. Over 50 percent of the converts were between ages of 18 and 39 years.
Only 19 percent were 60 years old or older.
A study of Shanghai Christians shows a steady increase of younger converts as well. In 1980,
15 percent of converts were under 40 years, 30 percent between the ages of 40 and 60 years,
and 55 percent above the age of 60 years. In 1990, 27 percent were under 40 years , 26 percent
between the ages 40 and 60 years, and 47 percent over the age of 60 years (see Li 1999:321).
Given the increase of young and well-educated Christians, beginning in the late 1980s,
TSPM churches in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Hangzhou, Dalian, and many other cities
started special worship services for young people (qing nian ju hui). The attendance at the
young people’s service was commonly in the hundreds, sometimes over a thousand. Many
young people have also flocked into “house churches.” Underground Bible study and fellow-
ship groups have been present on many university campuses (Lin-Liu 2005). My observations
and interviews in over a dozen cities throughout China provide much anecdotal evidence to affirm
this.
No educational information about the converts in Nanfang was available, but the occupation
information is indicative: only 30 percent were workers or suburban farmers. White-collar clerks
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 429
or professionals (medical, educational, technical) were 25 percent of the total, college students 7
percent, government cadres 5 percent, and business owners 4 percent. There were also 12 percent
of unknown occupation and 16 percent retirees, who could have been in any of the occupation
categories.
The above data contradict the commonly held impression that most Christians in China are
old, less educated, and peasants. Even if that was a somewhat accurate description in the 1980s,
we can say with confidence that an increasing proportion of the new converts in urban China are
young, well-educated, middle-class people. Such young urban Christians also play increasingly
important roles in the rapidly urbanizing China (Chen and Huang 2004).
INSTITUTIONAL CONSTRAINTS AND EAGER SEEKERS
Institutional factors are certainly important for the growth of Christianity in China. First,
Christian churches have been allowed to operate openly since 1979. By 1995, about 37,000
Protestant churches had been reopened for collective gatherings (Li 1999). Many of the urban
churches began gatherings specifically serving young people, as mentioned above. These churches
with buildings provide an institutional base for people to contact and practice Christianity. Second,
in 1982, about 5,900 Protestant ministers were called back from prisons, labor camps, and secular
jobs to perform religious services at government-approved churches. By 1995, about 18,000
Protestant ministers were active in TSPM churches (Li 1999).
However, the TSPM churches have been severely constrained by the government’s anti-
religious policies and restrictive regulations. First, almost all urban churches lack physical spaces.
The government has strictly controlled the number of reopened churches. In Beijing, for instance,
there were 66 Protestant churches in 1949, but only four are open now. In Shanghai, the 204
Protestant churches in 1949 were reduced to the eight that exist today. Document No. 19 of 1982,
which set the foundation for the religious policies ever since, stipulates: “We should also direct
the voluntary contributions of the mass of religious believers for construction work [of temples,
churches and mosques], so as to build as little as possible” (see MacInnis 1989:17). Consequently,
local government officials have been reluctant to grant building permits. In my fieldwork visits to
about a dozen cities, all of the Christian churches had difficulties in getting permission to open
more church buildings in spite of chronic overcrowding. During regular Sunday services, many
worshippers could not get into the fully packed sanctuary, thus had to stand or sit outside the
building, even if it was in the hot and humid summer in Guangzhou in the south or in the cold and
windy winter in Dalian in the northeast. Such physical limitations are not inviting to nonbelievers.
Some creative pastors have successfully gained government approval for holding multiple
worship services each week. However, almost all of such services were quickly filled to physical
capacity as well. Besides, increased worship services put greater demand on ministers for preach-
ing and preparation. Moreover, on Sundays when multiple services are held in a row, worshippers
have to vacate the sanctuary quickly for the next service immediately following it, consequently
having little time and space for fellowship interaction. This is not inviting to nonbelievers either.
Even some long-time believers had become discouraged from attending church due to such spatial
limitations and lack of fellowship interactions.
Second, in the government-sanctioned churches, the clergy/laity ratio was 1:508 in 1982 and
1:556 in 1995. Clergy shortage has been a chronic problem throughout China. The government
insists that, among other things, only seminary-trained people can become ministers. The govern-
ment prohibits “self-designated evangelists” (zi feng chuan dao ren) who do not hold an official
certificate sanctioned by the Religious Affairs Bureau. The police often hunt down and punish
such illegal evangelists. However, few people graduated from seminaries between 1949 and 1966,
and none between 1966 and 1979. Moreover, most of the pre-1949 trained veteran ministers are
aged, suffered psychological and physical tortures during the brutal Cultural Revolution, and
became feeble. With such a low ratio of clergy to laity, even the newly trained young ministers
430 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
are barely able to meet the routine religious needs of existing church members. Most of the
TSPM ministers I talked with expressed feelings of exhaustion in carrying out the routine tasks
of preaching, counseling, and rituals, as well as in dealing with the usual harassments of the state
control apparatus. These activities leave the ministers little energy to reach out to nonbelievers.
Third, the officially approved churches and ministers are not even allowed to proselytize
beyond their religious premises. Document No. 19 clearly states:
No religious organization or believer should propagate or preach religion outside places designated for religious
services, nor propagate theism, nor hand out religious tracts or other religious reading matter which has not been
approved for publication by the responsible government department. (see MacInnis 1989:18)
Violators may face administrative penalty and criminal prosecution.
Of course, underground churches, evangelists, and foreign missionaries have been active in
many parts of the country (Aikman 2003). However, throughout the 1980s and 1990s, they were
more active and effective in rural areas than in cities. This was because state control was usually
less rigorous in rural areas. In the city, under the more vigilant watch and resolute measures of
multiple government agencies (Religious Affairs Bureau, Public Security Bureau, Residential
Neighborhood Committee, etc.), clandestine evangelization is much more difficult to carry out
and sustain. Most efforts of urban underground evangelism is by individual Christians—fired-
up domestic evangelists and “tent-making” foreign missionaries.2 Because of the high risks of
illegal activities, such individual actions tend to be random, informal, and inconsistent. It is
difficult for such evangelists to maintain a long-time relationship with prospective converts, or
continue networking and nurturing any new converts.
Underground house churches do exist in the city. But I find that most of them try hard
to keep a low profile—limiting the gathering size, avoiding strangers, and singing and speak-
ing in reduced voices during gathering. I visited a house church in a northern metropolis. By
phone contact I was directed to meet a person in front of a McDonald’s (again!), then was
led through high-rise buildings in a residential neighborhood, and climbed to a top-floor apart-
ment. The small one-bedroom apartment was packed with about 30 young people—engineers,
lawyers, managers, and graduate students. A keyboard accompanied the hymn singing, and the
worship leader reminded the attendants to lower their voice and walk quietly to avoid disturbing
the neighbors. A disturbed neighbor might inform the police about the illegal gathering. The
pastor told me that when the attendance reached about this size they usually split into two gath-
erings in order to avoid attention by neighbors or the police. He also told me that they were
aware of the existence of some other house churches in this city, but they did not network with
each other. This was intended to avoid being caught in one dragnet. In case one house church
is found out by the police, it would cause little harm to other house churches. Even if some
participants are forced to confess, they would honestly have little to report about other groups.
Occasionally, a house church grows very fast and through intentional splits becomes a system
of numerous small house churches. This kind of group is on the high priority list of police
crackdowns.
In short, evangelization by both the aboveground and underground churches is significantly
curtailed by restrictive and repressive policies and regulations. However, institutional limitations
have not stopped seekers for Christianity. Inquirers continue flocking to churches without invita-
tion. “In south China, soon after the events in Beijing [the student-led democracy movement and
the Tiananmen massacre in June 1989], over 200 students came literally knocking on the door of
the local TSPM church seeking answers to their anguished questions” (Lambert 1999:156).
In Nanfang, a Christian leader told me this story. Some time ago an informal book club
of young intellectuals in the city picked up some Western philosophical and theological books
to read and discuss. Finally, they decided to read the Bible, which was considered one of the
most important books of the West. However, discussions turned directionless and frustrating.
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 431
Eventually, they agreed to find “a true and educated Christian” to explain the true meaning of the
Bible and Christian beliefs. A group of people became ready to be evangelized.
I observed with my own eyes something equally extraordinary. In summer 2000, as I was
passing through a southern coastal city on my way to Beijing, I stopped by to visit a TSPM
church’s weekly gathering of young people. It was a humid and hot Friday. Rain began pouring
in late afternoon. A friend and I took a taxi to the church, which was on the third floor of an
abandoned factory building. Walking through the stairs and hallways ornamented with broken
doors and ragged ceilings, I was expecting a small gathering on this rainy evening. Upon stepping
into the large hall with bare brick walls, I was immediately overwhelmed by the scene of over
200 young people. I was guided to a small office in a corner of the hall, where a woman pastor in
her 30s was chatting with a few first-time visitors while directing some co-workers to get things
ready for the evening. Within 15 minutes before the start of the night’s gathering, as I was hanging
around at the crowded small office, the pastor received three phone calls. All were from strangers
asking for the direction to the church and meeting information. And later they all came. After the
gathering was over, some of the newcomers came to the office to ask questions. But the pastor
was too busy to carry out a focused conversation with any individual. Without getting a chance
to ask a question, most of the visitors bought some books and left. Before leaving, some told the
pastor that they would return with questions.
During the service, I was offered a chance to speak to the congregation. I asked whether
anyone would be interested in being interviewed for my research. Dozens came up and wrote
their names and cell phone numbers on my notebook. Some wrote down their contact information
on a piece of paper and tucked it in my hands. But I was scheduled to fly out to Beijing the next
morning. Upon learning about this, several people followed me to the hotel, and two others called
me later and insisted on talking to me the next morning before my flight. Interestingly, while they
were very open in telling me about their experiences, they were no less eager to get answers to
their questions about Christian beliefs, in spite of my repeated disclaimer that I am a sociologist
rather than a preacher.
With so many active and enthusiastic seekers, it is not surprising to see the increase of discreet
evangelistic ministries in spite of the risks. My observations suggest that evangelistic missions in
China are more of a response to the growing interests in Christianity than a cause of the Christian
growth. In fact, institutional resources are barely keeping up with the increasing demand. Demand
is greater than supply, which is perhaps one of the factors for the flourishing of Christian-inspired
new religious movements (Bays 2003; Yang 2004b). There are too many people eager to learn
and accept Christianity, but too few qualified evangelists who have a good knowledge of Christian
doctrines. The presence of so many seekers for Christianity signifies the importance of the larger
social and cultural context.
THE CONTEXT: THE “SOCIALIST MARKET ECONOMY” IN THE GLOBALIZING WORLD
China has been undergoing dramatic changes. After more than a century of coerced modern-
ization full of imperialistic invasions, civil wars, and political turmoil, in 1979 the ruling Chinese
Communist Party launched “economic reforms and open-door” policies. By 1992, the CCP set as
the official goal to develop a “socialist market economy.” Although it has been recited routinely in
official documents and public speeches, the exact meaning of “socialist” in the “socialist market
economy” is not clear to most people. In practical terms, it simply means the absolute leadership
or the iron control of the Chinese Communist Party. The “socialist” market economy signifies
political repression alongside economic liberation.
The transition from a planned economy toward a market economy has greatly liberated
long suppressed economic productivity and creativity of the Chinese people, resulting in rapid
economic growth that has continued for over 25 years. During this time, many processes of
societal changes have happened rapidly and simultaneously, which have been documented or
432 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
summarized by social scientists (see, e.g., Dutton 1998; Davis 2000; Tang and Parish 2000).
Without going into detail on these changes, suffice it to say here that industrialization is mixed with
the information revolution, urbanization is accompanied by suburbanization, market transition
coincides with globalization, and rapid modernization concurs with postmodernization. Amid
these rapid, dramatic, and profound changes, social norms and bonds are broken down, conflicting
moral values are chaotically entangled, and corruptions have become rampant. These social
currents are disturbing and bewildering for many people, which may prompt individuals to seek
a theodicy, or a religious worldview, to bring sense and order to their lives (Weber [1922] 1963).
Struggling in the wild market with existential anxieties, many people begin to seek peace, security,
and meaning in religion. Some people find salvation in Christianity.
Below, I use interview materials to illustrate the impacts of the market, globalization, and
political repression upon the converts in urban China. Before doing that, a few words about the
sample of interviewees may be necessary. In summer 2000, my research assistant and I interviewed
35 Christians in Nanfang City. We rarely explicitly asked about their age. Relying on some life-
history events such as schooling and our subjective judgment, we believe that their ages varied
from early 20s to early 50s, with the majority around 30 years old. Two-thirds of the interviewees
were male. This gender bias in the sample was due to the constraints on me—a male researcher. It
was less difficult for me to develop rapport with male subjects. My research assistant was a female
graduate student. We interviewed most of our subjects together. I interviewed a number of male
Christians on my own and my research assistant independently conducted some interviews with
women. The interviewees include 10 owners or managers at private businesses or joint ventures,
15 professionals or white-collar clerks at companies, three working in the government, two college
students, and some others who had no stable jobs in a particular occupation. Among the latter
were at least two discreet evangelists whose living mostly relied on their own savings and/or
donations from fellow Christians. They do not comprise a sample representative of all converts
in this city. However, they reflect the growing trend of well-educated young converts in urban
China.
LOST IN THE MARKET
The emerging market economy has allowed greater freedom for adventurous individuals.
Before the economic reforms, jobs were assigned by the authorities and people’s lives were bound
by the assigned work unit (danwei), which was omnipotent in distributing every consumer product
through a comprehensive ration system. Along with the increase of private-owned businesses,
transnational companies, and joint venture enterprises, people have had more choices of jobs and
lifestyles. On the other hand, a sense of security has been lost. In the planned economy, every
urban resident enjoyed cradle-to-grave social welfare and every urban adult was guaranteed a job.
For many, the emerging market was like the unpredictable and unfathomable ocean. Once you
jump into it, you have to swim or sink, all on your own. Indeed, the emerging market in China
has been wild. It lacks clear rules and regulations, and it lacks moral, political, or legal authorities
to enforce rules and regulations. The market is primitive, chaotic, and perilous to individuals. All
of the three dozen interviewees shared the sense of once being lost in the market, then finding
salvation in Christianity.
After an evening gathering at the church, my research assistant interviewed Jennifer3 at a
nearby tea house, which had a spacious and neat setting comparable to a McDonald’s. Jennifer
is 30 years old. Her long hair is fashionably permed and dyed brunette, loosely spread on her
shoulders. Wearing a stylish black short skirt and sitting in a well-lit restaurant, she looks cool and
pretty. But her story was heartbreaking. After graduating from a teacher’s college, she became
a kindergarten teacher in 1990. She loved the job and devoted herself to caring for every child.
Before long, however, her boyfriend, a high school sweetheart whom she had dated for six years,
broke up with her. He wanted big money, fame, and status, and a kindergarten teacher-wife would
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 433
not help. Bitterness filled her heart. In a pique, she quit the kindergarten job and tried various jobs
in the hope of making more money. Wishing for good fortune, she burned incense sticks in front
of Buddhas and practiced qigong for health. She also tried drugs, sex, and other diversions, but
nothing gave her lasting satisfaction. By 1998, she felt exhausted, bored, and desperate. She once
visited a church in 1992 and received a copy of the Bible. Not until 1998 did she begin reading
the Bible seriously and participating in a young people’s fellowship actively. She said:
At a prayer meeting, the Holy Spirit came upon me. I confessed my sins of communicating with devils [practicing
qigong], premarital sex, drugs, bad relations with people, etc. After repeated confessions of all my sins, I was
released, and completely changed. I realize that everyone has original sin. But Jesus’ blood washes me clean. I
found the Bible was full of light, so I finished reading the New Testament without pausing. Then I ordered that
“all illnesses leave me.” Miraculously, since then I have rarely become sick. My work attitudes have completely
changed. In the past my relationships with colleagues were not good. I often felt hateful and jealous. Now when
someone treats me badly, I don’t get angry, but pray all the time. When you are filled with the love of Christ,
anything can be changed. My current boss was very suspicious of me at the beginning, but I prayed for her, and
now our relationship is very good. She even came to me to tell me about her family problems.
Like Jennifer, 29-year-old Monica is similarly pretty and fashionable. She loved literature
and dreamed to become a novelist or poet. But her mother pressed her to get into business and
sent her to a vocation school to learn fashion designing. Upon graduation her mother opened a
wedding-gown factory for her. But that was not her interest. Failing to resist, Monica became
extremely depressed. Only after a failed attempt of suicide by cutting her wrist did her mother
give in and close the factory. After that, Monica attended an English-language school and tried
various jobs, including working as a saleswoman and as a real estate agent. But she could not keep
those jobs for long because she did not feel it was right to lie to the customers as was required by
the boss. During this time her younger sister had problems with drugs and sex, and she herself
also slept with various men. Her father also had extramarital affairs. Fortuitously, she met some
college students from Hong Kong who introduced the gospel to her. In 1996, she and her sister
were baptized at an underground house church. Under Monica’s influence and persuasion, her
mother finally accepted Christ and was baptized three weeks before our interview. Her father has
also changed, and now refrains from even visiting questionable entertainment places. Monica
now works at her parents’ photo studio, which has 10 other employees.
Larry is a Nanfang native. After college he tried different jobs. For a while he was a salesman
for a beer company. The job required him to work in the night, mostly trying to sell beer to
nightclubs. He felt tired from working in the night and sleeping in the day, and felt bad about
spending too much time at nightclubs. He had a girlfriend for six years. But after she worked at
a joint venture company for six months, she married her boss from Hong Kong, then emigrated
to Singapore. Larry was confused. How could it be that six months were more important than
six years? Actually, they still loved each other, Larry said. When they broke off, both of them
cried and cried. In Singapore his ex-girlfriend became a Christian, then urged him to go to church
through phone calls and visits in person. Finally he agreed to try.
On the first day of 1999 I went to the church. It was Friday. I went again on the next day and again on Sunday.
I stayed through the Mandarin service and the local dialect service in the morning and then attended the young
people’s worship service in the afternoon. During the “praise and worship” singing time, I suddenly felt that all
of the nameless depressions and bitterness in my heart were taken out and away.
Larry had continued attending the church since then, and was to be baptized a few weeks from
when I interviewed him. He had quit the sales job and began working at his father’s garden
construction company.
Jennifer, Monica, and Larry all had some hard experiences in the market, but they could
be considered lucky in comparison with Cindy, who faced life-threatening challenges before
conversion to Christianity. She was born in Hubei in 1964.
434 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
My parents’ family origins (cheng fen) were not good. Father was a Guomindang (KMT) member and mother was
the single child of a big capitalist. I’m the fifth of six children. When I was small, all our possessions were taken
away. I felt very poor and always depressed. In elementary school, no matter how hard I tried I was not admitted
to the Youth Pioneers. In 1980 I graduated from middle school, but could not go on to high school. My father was
to retire, so he arranged for me to take a replacement position at the factory. I was only 16 years old at that time.
She had to work to support the family. While working as a lathe operator, she self-taught and
finished high school courses on her own. In 1984 she took a special exam and was admitted to the
Television College (dian shi da xue), a distant adult education program. Studying while working
for three years, finally she earned a junior college diploma in law. Then she asked for absence
without pay from the factory. That had become possible as the economic reforms deepened by
that time. She found a temporary job at a law firm, worked very hard and did very well. But she
could not become a formal employee because the law firm employees had to be cadres (gan bu)
and her status was a worker (gong ren). She should have had an opportunity to take an exam
in order to change her work status, but a government official in charge of legal affairs took the
opportunity away and gave the position to his nephew. Such corrupt practices by governmental
officials were not rare.
That was the year 1989. Some political factors were involved as well. We were defending some of the prosecuted
activists of the democracy movement. But our law firm director told us to look out for ourselves, don’t try too
hard. There was also some stuff in dealing with the judges, which is hard to explain in one or two sentences. In
short, my conscience could not bear it. So I quit, and came to Nanfang at the end of 1989.
Knowing nobody, she wandered to a small coastal city. Alone but determined, she ventured into
a privately owned hardware factory. Luckily, she was taken in and became a warehouse keeper.
At this factory of about 2,000 workers, through hard work, Cindy quickly moved up and became
the office director. Soon the owner offered her a new position—the general manager of a liquid
crystal manufacturing factory that had 600 employees. That was an exciting challenge for a young
woman.
After two years, however, I felt tired of it because the factory had all kinds of people. Some were fugitive murderers
who came here to hide. Some were gangsters and bandits. When I fired some men, they threatened to set arson
on the building or kill me. So I quit, and then found a sales position at an appliance company. I first did exporting
to other countries, then selling appliances in other parts of the country. As usual, I did very well. Shortly after I
was assigned as the sales manager at my hometown in Hubei. While working for the appliance company, in 1992
I also opened a store selling auto parts. I worked from six o’clock in the morning till midnight all the time. I made
some money, appeared to be a strong woman. And I began to despise men, and thought I could control my fate,
control everything. I smoked and drank. And my psychology became somewhat abnormal. My male employees
would tremble when they saw me. I often made fun of them, did some bad things. Then, suddenly, one day I found
blood in my urine. The diagnosis turned out to be bladder cancer, stage IV. I needed surgery immediately. That
forced me stop to think. I thought, what are all these for? What is the meaning of life? Nothing! None! I was not
really afraid of death. I already had a rich and colorful life. Actually I sometimes envied those who had rested in
graves. The night before the surgery, I took a notebook and wrote down: “life, ideal, career, whatever, everything
is in the hands of God (shang di). No person can change it.” At that time I did not know God, but after I wrote
that, my heart strangely felt peace. The next day, before the surgery, the intern doctor took me to take another lab
test. A miracle had happened. The cancer cells disappeared! My sister wondered whether it was a false diagnosis.
Even the doctors could not explain it.
Coming out of the hospital, Cindy sold the auto-parts store and moved back to the southern city
in which she used to work. From 1994 to 1999, she tried different jobs, made some business trips
to Hong Kong, Singapore, and Vietnam, but all her business efforts ended up with failure.
In the past I could succeed no matter what I did. But now I failed no matter what I tried. I found nothing to hold up
my life. I was like a walking zombie. I considered suicide. But I thought, life shouldn’t be like that. I thought, there
must be something that I should do and would never regret. But I did not know what it was. In 1999 I got a phone
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 435
call from a friend in Singapore, who suggested I read the Bible. I bought one and tried to read. Later I came to
Nanfang to attend a psychology workshop. Another participant in the workshop was a Christian, who introduced
me to the Timothy Training Course taught by an American named Tom. I took the course seriously, and read
the Bible eagerly. During that period, all the past things passed through my head like on a screen. I realized that
God protected me all along. I confessed all my sins, cried a lot to God. God is so good and loving. I experienced
speaking in tongues. My heart had never felt so happy.
Since then, not only has Cindy become happy and peaceful, she has also begun sharing the
Christian “good news” with others. She began leading the Timothy Training Course in her city.
Her testimony helped many people convert. That made her think that what she had experienced
was not meaningless, but was God’s preparation for her to do evangelism. In light of the new
faith, all past experiences of successes and failures have become meaningful, useful, and helpful
to others. When I interviewed her, she was preparing to become a full-time evangelist in Nanfang.
Within this social and cultural context, even good fortune may lead people to Christian con-
version. John, a salesman for a pharmaceutical company, asked me to meet him at a McDonald’s.
After graduating from a medical school he was assigned a job, but soon he quit and became a
salesman. He told me that he could not understand why he had been successful in the perilous
market while his former classmates or friends often failed. He did not think it was simply because
of his wisdom or personal effort. “By chance or probability I would have been failed as well.”
His conversion to Christianity was uneventful and had little intellectual or emotional struggle. He
first visited a church on Christmas of 1995. He told me about it.
The hymns were beautiful. They sang and sang and sang, without stop. Very interesting. I thought, wouldn’t it be
fun to come on Sundays to practice singing? The sermon was very good too. I understood it, although it was in the
local dialect. It was very moving, touching my heart. So I began attending church regularly. As a matter of fact, I
loved going to church. For a while, I went to church at least two times a week, by riding a bicycle for 40 minutes
each way, sometimes in rain.
John pointed out that the Christian activities were interesting and apparently compatible with his
lifestyle. He also emphasized that Christians were elected and blessed by God. For him, this was a
powerful explanation for his good fortune. He also experienced personal changes in the new faith.
For example, he used to smoke, tried several times to quit, but each time he ended up smoking
even more. After being told by a Christian brother that Christians should not smoke, he quit. This
time, he said, it was actually without much struggle. The cigarette simply became nauseating,
another sign of God’s blessing to him.
POLITICAL REPRESSION
Besides the emerging and chaotic market, repressive politics is another important contextual
factor for some young people converting to Christianity. In fact, the economic and political factors
are intertwined. The road toward a “socialist market economy” under the leadership of the Chinese
Communist Party has been very bumpy. Along the way, several political campaigns threatened
to derail or reverse the reforms. These include the “anti-capitalist spiritual pollution” campaign
in 1983, the “anti-capitalist liberalism” campaign in 1986, and the violent suppression of the
pro-democracy movement in 1989. On June 4, 1989, the government sent tanks to the Tiananmen
Square to crush the student-led movement. Idealistic dreams were shattered by the tanks and
bloodshed. Disillusioned with communism, many young intellectuals began seeking alternatives.
Among my interviewees, several people recalled the impact of the Tiananmen Square incident
on their spiritual pursuit. Adam from Jiangxi Province is a good example. He was in college in
1989, majored in engineering.
Since elementary school I had been a class leader (ban gan bu) and a “three-good” [athletic, scholastic, and
virtuous] student. During the 1989 student movement, I took to the streets. Afterwards, because I was a student
436 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
leader, I was punished by delayed graduation, and then was assigned a job of physical labor at a power plant in
a remote town. At the plant, because of my bad personnel file (dang’an), I was often given “small tight shoes to
wear” [i.e., people intentionally made his life miserable]. My heart was bitter. I felt that everything was upside
down and the whole world was messed up. I did not know where my goal of life lay. Why strive? What for? But
if you are not vigilant and fighting back, you’ll be like meat on the chopping board waiting to be cut up by other
people. I read Daoist philosophy, but was not sure I understood it. It seemed meaningful, but my heart found no
rest or peace. A college friend once told me about the gospel, but our classmates all said he was crazy. When I was
very depressed, one day I went to his house. He received me warmly. But he was a new believer himself. I asked
him dozens of questions, and he could not even utter a word. Finally he threw me a Bible and said, “Go back and
read it for a year, then we’ll talk.” I went home, flipped a few pages, but could not understand a thing, and threw
it aside.
My job was physical labor at the power plant. The coal under my feet was over 80 degrees Celsius. After a couple of
hours, the shoe bottom would be scorched. Working underneath the air cylinder power generator to make repairs,
you would lose hearing for ten minutes. In that environment I worked with all my strength, because my heart was
empty and the after-work hours were even more stifling. In that small town, I did not understand the local dialect,
and it was impossible for me to find a person to chat with. So I wanted to find a difficult book to read in order to
kill time. I picked up the Bible again. Then, I was grabbed by these words: “Come to me, all you who are weary
and burdened, and I will give you rest.” I cried for a whole night. This was what the Dao De Jing couldn’t give
me. I read the Bible day and night, and the Christian Radio in Hong Kong helped me to understand. Later, that
college friend took me to a house church, where I got baptized in 1993.
Adam was 25 years old at that time. Like many young intellectuals who participated in the pro-
democracy movement and then suffered formal prosecution or disciplinary punishment, Adam’s
political aspirations became doomed. But his mind could not be buried under the machines. In
search of an alternative meaning system to communism, he tried Daoism in vain, and then found
salvation in Christianity. After conversion, Adam quit the job and moved to Nanfang. He tried
various jobs “in order to gain experiences and test my strengths and abilities,” as he said. Before
long, he started his own business firm. Meanwhile, he became a highly respected leader at the
young people’s worship service at the TSPM church. He also organized a Christian Businesspeople
Fellowship (shang ren tuan qi).
The impact of the June 4 1989 incident is also evident in Ben’s conversion. Ben was born in
1966 in Fujian Province. His mother’s father was the first Christian in his family.
During the Cultural Revolution, my parents dared not tell me they were Christian. Only after I got into college did
they tell me. But at that time I was wildly arrogant, and I ferociously debated with my mother. After graduating
from college in 1988 I came to Nanfang. When I first arrived, I did not know the local dialect, local culture, local
people, or local places. It was very hard. During the 1989 democracy movement period, I did not go to work, but
took to the streets with great excitement. The development afterward was very disheartening. I thought there was
no hope for this country. After June Fourth I went to church every week. At that time I did not understand the
local dialect very well. But one Sunday the sermon was so powerful that I finally understood. Christianity is not
a religion, but a faith. I now believe that the world and people are created by God. I believe that the Holy Spirit is
very important. I feel the change and difference inside me.
Baptized in 1997, Ben was an active worker in the Christian Businesspeople Fellowship, which
often gathered for Bible study or sharing at his office in an upscale building. He was the general
manager of a shipping company. Besides Adam and Ben, Cindy and several others also mentioned
the 1989 democracy movement in their conversion stories. Interestingly, they interpreted it not
so much as a political incident, but more of a spiritual turning point, related to their feelings,
sentiments, hopes, and attitudes toward life.
After the Tiananmen Square incident, many of the democracy movement activists fled to the
West. A number of them have converted to Christianity. The most prominent is Yuan Zhiming. Be-
fore exile, Yuan was a Ph.D. candidate in Marxist philosophy at Renmin University of China. He
was one of the scriptwriters of the popular television documentary series River Elegy, which criti-
cized Chinese political culture and served as one of the incitements for the democracy movement.
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 437
In 1991, he was baptized in Princeton, New Jersey, and soon entered seminary. In the last decade
or so, Yuan has been one of the most active and popular evangelists among the Chinese in North
America. His writings and audio/video-taped preaching are widely circulated among intellectuals
both outside and inside China. He is one of the advocates regarding the inseparable relationship
between democracy and Christianity (Yuan 1992).
Another scriptwriter of the River Elegy, Xie Xuanjun, a renowned mythologist, also became
Christian. Among the 21 student activists on the most wanted list of the Chinese government,
Zhang Boli and Xiong Yan have become Christian ministers. Like my interviewees in Nanfang,
these Christian converts now dedicate themselves to Christian evangelism instead of political
activism. Many more lesser-known activists have become Christian as well. Meanwhile, some
confessed Christians are also prominent political activists, including Han Dongfang, the organizer
of an independent workers union during the 1989 democracy movement, who was jailed, exiled
to the United States, and prohibited from returning to Beijing. Other converts include Wang
Bingzhang, a veteran democracy activist in the United States who has been involved in organizing
political parties against the Chinese Communist Party, and Yang Jianli, another democracy activist
in the United States who has been jailed in China after he slipped into China to investigate worker
uprisings.
Indeed, the year 1989 was an important turning point in regard to Chinese conversion to
Christianity. In North America, until 1989, Christian proselytizing efforts among mainland Chi-
nese students and scholars had very limited success. After the Tiananmen Square incident, many
mainland Chinese flocked to Chinese American churches (Yang 1999, 2000). In the PRC, a sim-
ilar sudden increase has been observed (Lambert 1999). In Nanfang, according to the official
church records, there was a spiking increase of baptisms immediately after 1989 (see Figure 1).
The sudden increase took many people off guard. Facing political ramifications, many churches
conveniently “lost” their baptismal records of 1991 and 1992.
SAVED AT MCDONALD’S?
McDonald’s opened its first restaurant in China in 1990. By 2000, dozens of “Golden Arches”
dotted the rapidly changing skylines of Nanfang. Some are in skyscrapers and some in underground
shopping malls. Unlike McDonald’s in America, which is a fast food restaurant where people
often rush in and out, the McDonald’s restaurants in Nanfang that I visited in summer 2000
were always filled with leisurely crowds, with chatting noise permeating the whole restaurant and
beyond. The tape recordings of my interviews at McDonald’s are half drowned out by the noise.
But that was my interviewees’ favorite place to meet with a strange researcher on such a sensitive
topic.
The attraction of McDonald’s appears to be its culture more than the food: it offers a private
space at a table in a public space at the restaurant. It is an accessible and acceptable public place
to meet a stranger without exposing one’s home or office. Meanwhile, as soon as two or more
people sit at a table with a drink or a packaged meal, the table instantly becomes private until they
leave. No other customers should invade this space. That was why clandestine Timothy Training
Courses and small group Bible study sessions favored McDonald’s as a gathering place. It was
noisy. But the noisiness itself seemed to be a layer of protection—we did not need to worry much
about the listening ears at nearby tables. As religion remains a politically sensitive topic in today’s
China, these kinds of precautions seem necessary.
But the symbolism of McDonald’s goes beyond the immediate attraction of the atmosphere.
McDonald’s is a symbol of modern cosmopolitan culture. All of the McDonald’s restaurants
in Nanfang are spacious, well-lit, clean, and with well-maintained toilets. This is in contrast
to the physical setting of common local restaurants. Anthropologist James L. Watson (1997)
observes that the first presence of McDonald’s in Hong Kong compelled local restaurants to
renovate accordingly, resulting in a changed dietary culture. It is more than just dietary culture,
438 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
but a sign of the modern and middle-class lifestyle, a sign of cosmopolitanism. Sociologist
George Ritzer observes that in America “Eating fast food at McDonald’s has certainly become a
‘sign’ that, among other things, one is in tune with the contemporary lifestyle” (Ritzer 2000:11).
Anthropologists have observed that a new class of yuppies in China has embraced the company
as a means of connecting to the world. “In the eyes of Beijing residents, McDonald’s represents
Americana and the promise of modernization” (Yan 1997:41). “The Chinese media could barely
restrain their enthusiasm for McDonald’s during the restaurants’ first three years of operation in
the People’s Republic; the company was celebrated as a model of modernization, sanitation, and
responsible management” (Watson 1997:4).
In light of these sociological and anthropological observations, we can see that McDonald’s
and Christianity share similar symbolic meanings to the educated young Chinese: modernity and
cosmopolitanism. For the Chinese, eating at McDonald’s is a sign of being in tune with modern
culture and offers a sense of connecting with the outside, Western world. Similarly, believing
in Christianity is accepting a universal religion that has been predominant in the modern West.
Both McDonald’s and Christianity offer a sense of individual freedom, civility, responsibility, and
status for the yuppies in urban China. Moreover, both have become accessible during the process
of China’s market transition and global integration.
However, the symbolism of McDonald’s stops here. McDonald’s was one of the attractive
places where young urban Chinese liked to gather for Bible study or talk about their newfound
religion. But it is the Christian religion, not McDonald’s, that offers them salvation. My re-
search assistant and I also conducted interviews at Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) restaurants
and some local Chinese restaurants or tea houses that had a comparable physical setting. Be-
sides McDonald’s, the English language carries similar symbolism. Some of my interviewees in
Nanfang and other cities first learned about Christianity by practicing English with Westerners
at “English corners” on university campuses or public parks. In the northeastern city of Dalian,
the TSPM church offered an English Sunday School class in order to attract college students.
Before long it evolved into the young people’s Sunday gathering, with 500 to 600 in regular
attendance. In Nanchong, a remote city in Sichuan in the southwest, the church’s offering of an
English Sunday School class similarly attracted hundreds of young people, including high school
students. A few “tent-making” missionaries (see note 2) teaching at colleges there suddenly
found an easy access to people for evangelization. I have also seen some newly built churches
in the rural areas in the mountainous regions of Sichuan Province that have English names
embossed on the church building. The function of such English names is more symbolic than
practical.
The attraction of the English language, McDonald’s, or KFC is not so much for Western-
ization, but more for a sense of connecting with the outside world, reflecting the Chinese desire
for global integration and modernity. Eating at McDonald’s or speaking English does not make a
person American. Similarly, becoming Christian does not make a Chinese a Westerner. However,
in a symbolic sense, adopting Christianity and eating at McDonald’s make the Chinese feel they
have gained an equal footing with the Americans and other Westerners as modern world citizens.
China under the CCP is embracing globalization while traveling the bumpy road toward a
market economy. The rapid changes involved in a transitional economy have both enticed and
discarded individuals. In urban China, while struggling for success or survival in the market, many
individuals begin to seek certainty, peace, and comfort in religion. Some people find salvation in
Christianity, a nontraditional religion in China. In contrast to traditional Chinese religions—which
are often regarded as premodern and parochial by Chinese intellectuals—Christianity today is
commonly perceived as modern, cosmopolitan, and universal. The urban Chinese young people
described in this article tend to adore McDonald’s. For them, both Christianity and McDonald’s
are part of a modern, cosmopolitan culture. Moreover, McDonald’s also offers a kind of certainty,
as it is known for its predictability and efficiency (Ritzer 2000). By frequenting McDonald’s and
converting to Christianity, young urban Chinese get psychological peace, security, and certainty.
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 439
They also gain a sense of participating in the new and glamorous dimensions of contemporary
cultural change without exposing themselves directly to the vagaries of the global market.
CONCLUSION
China is in great transformation. One of the profound changes is widespread conversion
to Christianity. Some (e.g., Aikman 2003; Lambert 1999) have boldly predicted that within the
next 30 years, one-third of China’s population could become Christian, making China one of the
largest Christian nations in the world. This in turn would reshape the world political landscape
in “the clash of civilizations” (Huntington 1993, 1998). To prudent scholars, such journalist or
evangelist predictions may seem presumptuous. However, the emerging scholarly literature (e.g.,
Bays 2003; Dunch 2001; Hunter and Chan 1993) also shows that Christianity is indeed growing
very fast in China today. “Today, on any given Sunday there are almost certainly more Protestants
in church in China than in all of Europe” (Bays 2003:488). This article provides further evidence
of Christian conversions among well-educated young people in urban China.
To explain religious conversion, the individualistic and institutional approaches have been
dominant in the sociology of religion. The former focuses on the micro-level factors of individual
crisis, personal bonds, and networks that are developed or broken down. The latter emphasizes
the competitive strength of religious organizations as suppliers in the religious market. Factors of
individual psychology and interpersonal bonds in small networks are certainly at work, and are
evident in the interviews here. Meanwhile, the rapid growth of Christianity in China has important
institutional sources: Christian organizations have been actively proselytizing. However, both
of the individualistic and institutional approaches are inadequate to account for conversions to
Christianity in China today. My argument is that the micro- and meso-level factors have to be
situated in the macro-level, broader contexts, within which religious organizations proselytize
and individuals convert. The crucial context for Chinese conversions to Christianity in China
today is the globalizing market economy under political repression. The cases presented here
are representative of Christian conversion stories that I heard during the research. The converts
commonly struggled with various kinds of jobs in the emerging market and once lived lifestyles that
they now consider morally unacceptable and devoid of meaning. They were lost in an exciting yet
perilous market, became disillusioned with the repressive politics, and bewildered by conflicting
values. Existential anxieties drove people to seek certainty amid puzzling uncertainties, clarity
amid confusing ambiguities, and the absolute amid myriad relativities. Their interest in a religious
worldview or thirst for religion was heightened. Some Chinese search internally within Chinese
traditional religions, and some people find salvation in Christianity.
In today’s China, religious seekers often seek out Christian churches to learn about this
nontraditional religion. In line with the Chinese pursuit of modernization and global integration
throughout the 20th century, many educated Chinese tend to prefer a meaning system that is
universal instead of particularly Chinese. In the context of a globalizing market under political
repression, many Chinese perceive Christianity as liberating, democratic, modern, cosmopolitan,
or universal. They regard Buddhism, Daoism, and Confucianism as backward-looking and tradi-
tionalistic, and thus incompatible with the market economy and increasingly globalizing world.
Moreover, the presence of McDonald’s, foreign teachers, businesspeople, and evangelists has
made this nontraditional religion more accessible. At this intersection of time and space, Chris-
tianity fills the spiritual void for many people in urban China and is very likely to continue to
grow.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The fieldwork research of the larger project was made possible with grants from Professional and Educational
Services International, the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion, the Religious Research Association, the University
440 JOURNAL FOR THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF RELIGION
of Southern Maine, and Purdue University. I am grateful to Yang Huilin at the Institute for the Study of Christian Culture
of the Renmin University of China for organizational support. I thank Helen Rose Ebaugh, Dean R. Hoge, Graeme Lang,
Joseph B. Tamney, Patricia A. Wittberg, JSSR anonymous reviewers, and editor Rhys Williams for their helpful comments
and suggestions on earlier drafts of this article.
NOTES
1. Moreover, China has become rapidly urbanized. According to the Chinese government published statistics, the rural
population has decreased from 82.1 percent in 1978 to 69.9 percent in 1998 (see Chen and Huang 2004:199).
2. The PRC prohibits Christian missionaries. Westerners who want to spread the Christian gospel have to go to China as
English teachers or professionals, like Paul went on mission trips by making tents for self-support (New Testament,
Acts:18:3).
3. Almost all of my interviewees in Nanfang had an English (American) name, but I use pseudonyms here.
REFERENCES
Aikman, D. 2003. Jesus in Beijing: How Christianity is transforming China and changing the global balance of power.
Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing.
ANS (Amity News Service). 1997. How many Christians are there in China. Available at http://is7.pacific.net.
hk/∼amityhk/96 4 spe.htm.
Bainbridge, W. S. 1992. The sociology of conversion. In Handbook of religious conversion, edited by H. N. Malony and
S. Southard, pp. 178–91. Birmingham, AL: Religious Education Press.
Barker, E. 1984. The making of a Moonie: Brainwashing or choice? New York: Basil Blackwell.
Bays, D. H. 2003. Chinese Protestant Christianity today. China Quarterly 174(2):488–504.
Brown, G. T. 1986. Christianity in the People’s Republic of China, rev. ed. Atlanta, GA: John Knox Press.
Chao, J. 1981. Cong huaren liaohui fazhan shi kan jiaohui zengzhang [Church growth in the history of Chinese churches].
In Jindai Zhongguo yu Jidujiao lunwen ji [Essays on modern China and Christianity], edited by L. Zhiping,
pp. 345–62. Taipei: Yuzhouguang Press.
Chao, J. and R. Chong. 1997. A history of Christianity in socialist China, 1949–1997. Taipei: China Ministries International
Publishing Co.
Chen, C. and T. Huang. 2004. The emergence of a new type of Christians in China today. Review of Religious Research
46(2):183–200.
Davidman, L. 1991. Tradition in a rootless world: Women turn to orthodox Judaism. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Davidman, L. and A. Greil. 1993. Gender and the experience of conversion: The case of “returnees” to modern orthodox
Judaism. Sociology of Religion 54:83–100.
Davis, D. S., ed. 2000. The consumer revolution in urban China. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dunch, R. 2001. Protestant Christianity in China today: Fragile, fragmented, flourishing. In China and Christianity:
Burdened past, hopeful future, edited by S. Uhalley, Jr. and W. Xiaoxin, pp. 195–216. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Dutton, M., ed., 1998. Streetlife China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Finke, R. and R. Stark. 1992. The churching of America, 1776−1990: Winners and losers in our religious economy. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Froese, P. 2001. Hungary for religion: A supply-side interpretation of the Hungarian religious revival. Journal for the
Scientific Study of Religion 40(2):251–68.
——. 2004. After atheism: An analysis of religious monopolies in the post-communist world. Sociology of Religion
65(1):57–75.
Froese, P. and S. Pfaff. 2001. Replete and desolate markets: Poland, East Germany, and the new religious paradigm. Social
Forces 80(2):481–507.
Greil, A. and D. R. Rudy. 1984. What have we learned from process models of conversion?: An examination of ten case
studies. Sociological Focus 17:305–23.
Hefner, R. W. 1993. Conversion to Christianity: Historical and anthropological perspectives on a great transformation.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Hoge, D. R. 1981. Converts, dropouts, returnees: A study of religious change among Catholics. New York: Pilgrims Press.
Hunter, A. and K.-K. Chan. 1993. Protestantism in contemporary China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Huntington, S. P. 1993. The clash of civilizations. Foreign Affairs 72(3):28–50.
——. 1998. The clash of civilizations and the remaking of world order. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Kaufman, D. R. 1991. Rachel’s daughters: Newly orthodox Jewish women. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Kilbourne, B. and J. T. Richardson. 1989. Paradigm conflict, types of conversion, and conversion theories. Sociological
Analysis 50:1–21.
LOST IN THE MARKET, SAVED AT MCDONALD’S 441
Lambert, T. 1999. China’s Christian millions. London and Grand Rapids, MI: Monarch Books.
Leung, K.-l. 1999. The rural churches of Mainland China since 1978. Hong Kong: Alliance Bible Seminary Press.
Li, P. 1999. 90 niandai zhongguo zongjiao fazhan zhuangkuang baogao [A report of the status of religious development
in China in the 1990s]. Journal of Christian Culture (Beijing) 2:201–22.
Lin-Liu, J. 2005. At Chinese universities, whispers of Jesus. Chronicle of Higher Education, June 10:40.
Lofland, J. and R. Stark. 1965. Becoming a world-saver: A theory of conversion to a deviant perspective. American
Sociological Review 30:862–75.
MacInnis, D. E. 1989. Religion in China today: Policy and practice. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.
Martin, D. 1990. Tongues of fire: The explosion of Protestantism in Latin America. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Musick, M. and J. Wilson. 1995. Religious switching for marriage reasons. Sociology of Religion 56:257–70.
Newport, F. 1979. The religious switchers in the United States. American Sociological Review 44:528–52.
Ng, K. H. 2002. Seeking the Christian tutelage: Agency and culture in Chinese immigrants’ conversion to Christianity.
Sociology of Religion 63(2):195–214.
Overmyer, D. L., ed. 2003. Religion in China today (The China Quarterly special issues). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Ritzer, G. 2000. The McDonaldization of society, new century ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Roof, W. C and C. K. Hadaway. 1979. Denominational switching: Going beyond Stark and Glock. Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion 18:363–79.
Snow, D. A. and R. Machalek. 1984. The sociology of conversion. Annual Review of Sociology 10:167–90.
Stark, R. and R. Finke. 2000. Acts of faith: Explaining the human side of religion. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.
Suchman, M. C. 1992. Analyzing the determinants of everyday conversion. Sociological Analysis 53S:S15–S33.
Sullins, D. P. 1993. Switching close to home: Volatility or coherence in Protestant affiliation patterns. Social Forces
72:399–421.
Tamney, J. B. and L. H.-L. Chiang. 2002. Modernization, globalization, and Confucianism in Chinese societies. Westport,
CT: Praeger.
Tang, W. and W. Parish. 2000. Chinese urban life under reform: The changing social contract. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Watson, J. L., ed. 1997. Golden arches east: McDonald’s in East Asia. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Weber, M. [1922] 1963. The sociology of religion. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Yan, Y. 1997. McDonald’s in Beijing: The localization of Americana. In Golden Arches east: McDonald’s in East Asia,
edited by James L. Watson, pp. 39–76. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Yang, F. 1998. Chinese conversion to evangelical Christianity: The importance of social and cultural contexts. Sociology
of Religion: A Quarterly Review 59(3):237–57.
——. 1999. Chinese Christians in America: Conversion, assimilation, and adhesive identities. University Park, PA: Penn
State University Press.
——. 2000. The Chinese Gospel Church: The sinicization of Christianity. In Religion and the new immigrants: Continuities
and adaptations in immigrant congregations, edited by H. R. Ebaugh and J. S. Chafetz, pp. 89–107. Walnut Creek,
CA: AltaMira Press.
——. 2002. Religious diversity among the Chinese in America. In Religions in Asian America: Building faith communities,
edited by P. G. Min and J. H. Kim, pp. 71–98. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
——. 2004a. Between secularist ideology and desecularizing reality: The birth and growth of religious research in
communist China. Sociology of Religion, A Quarterly Review 65(2):101–19.
——. 2004b. An economics of religious shortage: Communist China in transition. Presented at Society for the Scientific
Study of Religion Annual Meeting, Kansas City, MO, October 22–24.
Yuan, Z. 1992. shangdi yu minzhu [God and Democracy]. Zhongguo zhi chun [China Spring, a dissident Chinese magazine
published in New York] 6:40–43.
